Welcome to an exciting lecture on memory management in C++ as promised to you in the last lecture we're
going to talk a little bit more about what that t shared pointer is about in this lecture.
So let's dive right in without further ado.
The first thing to note is that if you are very well versed in the C++ and unreal memory management
you may just want to watch this video at double speed just as a quick revision.
If you're not so well versed then do take a good long hard look at it and they'll be an exercise in
the middle that should really help consolidate your knowledge.
Okay so the first thing we need to talk about is the stack and the heap now.
You may be familiar with this as a C++ programmer already but I'm just going to review what goes on
with the stack and heap.
These are two segments of memory that are used very differently.
The stack is used in a very structured way and the heap is used in a very messy way so the stack for
example is a slot of memory per function call so you'd have the main function it might create some variables
within the function.
And this would go on the stack in a little block of memory then the main function calls the game loop
and the game loop may create some more memory and put it after the block of memory where Main put its
stuff and then the game loop might call tick and tick will be able to go ahead and create some more
memory and as you can see a pattern here as we go down we are as adding more and more memory and then
take my call dot product to help it get its job done and what product will all call memory and so on
so forth down the stack.
But the important thing here is that when dot product has finished doing its job it can clear up.
It's what's called the stack frame which is this box here a round up product which has all the memory
that it created for itself.
So it's very organized as you go down the stack you start to add memory to the bottom of the stack and
as you return from these functions you can remove the memory that they were using from the stacks so
very nice very orderly leads to a very unfair lag mentored memory.
But there is a problem sometimes.
You want memory to go between function calls so for example you might have called dot product but then
you want to call to something else and you want to share a bit of memory.
Let's give a more concrete example for example you might have play a 1 and he might have a mesh and
you might have play two and he might have a mesh as well.
And these guys are going to want that mesh to hang around really between function calls.
He came to want it to be there between different ticks of the game loop so that's quite important.
And these players might have pointers to each to their own guy and you can see this is much more messy.
This would go on the heap.
This is called dynamic memory allocation because you aren't doing it just when you call a function.
You are doing it when but basically whenever when you when there is a game event for example you might
spawn a new player in return.
In response to one player getting shot in the head and you may change out the guns based on the player
scrolling the scroll wheel to swap the guns and so on and so forth.
You might even swap out the mesh and things like that.
So this is dynamic because we are allocating deallocated memory as we go based on real time input whereas
here on the stack were much more traditional about how were allocating memory which is doing it based
on every new function a bit more memory.
It's very straightforward.
That's the stack versus the heap one is messy.
One is organized.
We're going to be talking about how we can make a little bit of order out of the chaos that's going
on the heap.
The stack doesn't need much order.
It's very straightforward how you allocate and then allocate that memory.
The heap on the other hand we have to talk about a little bit more.
So one approach the C++ approach by itself is that you do everything manually so when you want to create
a new player you would have to allocate the memory for the new player on the heap and you would need
to keep track of that pointer and it would be your responsibility to make sure that that pointer is
then deallocated before you are deallocated So in the destructor of your class which is being called
when you are being destroyed you need to make sure you destroy anything that you have pointers to.
Otherwise you're going to end up with memory leaks.
Now obviously this relies on people's memories so it's not a very good process because it's going to
mean that you need to remember to deallocate everything you allocate.
So people invented a process called reference counting.
This is what reference counting is a match and you had the stack.
That looks very much like this except at the top level we've got the map pointing back to both of the
players.
Now in a reference counting example what happens is for every object that is reference from the top
level will assume that the top level is the map.
Every object reference from there.
We give it a reference count that's how many people are currently using this object so we've got player
1 and play two are both got one reference because the map references them.
Got the Mesha has got two references because that's referenced by both players player one player to
a ref by reference.
I mean it has a pointer to it.
Somebody has a pointer to this and the guns also just have one reference each.
So what happens in this case if the map decides oh I'm going to drop my reference to play it too.
I'm going to stop caring about Player 2 so we cut off that reference what happens.
Well we decrements the reference count for Play a 2 and when there are zero references we know that
nobody is carrying about this player 2 anymore so we can get rid of it.
So that's what we do we get rid of player too and we make sure that when we're in the calling the destructor
for Play a two will also be getting rid of the references to the meche and the gun.
And that means that we are going to go ahead and decrement those we get the gun down to zero the meche
goes down to one.
So because the Met has gone down to one it can stay alive it's not gone down to zero and somebody still
needs it and that the gun we have the decrements to zero so that can get destroyed.
So that's great.
And you'd think perfect.
We've got that whole memory thing sorted.
There's no more need to worry.
Well there are some disadvantages to this approach.
One of the disadvantages is what happens if you have a circular reference.
What if play are two references gun and gun references play a two then they would always have a reference
of greater than zero.
And so you get a memory leak you're never going to free up that memory.
There's ways of making sure that you never end up with those cycles.
But again you have to remember not to end up with those cycles.
And that can be very problematic.
Another problem that is specifically very important in game engines is that when you delete something
like a player too it might set off a cascade of deletions which could pause your game essentially make
your tic last for a very long time while you go ahead and clear up the player in all its guns and all
of its armour and or its inventory and all those things get destroyed while you wait for that.
You have players just sitting there twiddling their thumbs and wondering why all of a sudden the game
has frozen.
This is obviously not a great approach.
So there is another way of doing memory management called garbage collection.
Now you may have heard of garbage collection before.
Let's just talk about how it works in garbage collection.
You have a set of objects that you know to exist.
In this case its all these objects here we've got the map player one player two mesh gun one gun.
Then called it gun one gun one I did not mean to call them Gun one and gun two.
So you have got this set of objects that you know to be alive.
And what we do is we cut off one of our references here and we try and determine which of these objects
can no longer be reached from the top level.
And we do is quite simply by walking down through each of these links and saying Okay well the map can
be reached because its the top level.
Its part of what real would call the root set.
And then we walk down all the references it has and set and mark them as reachable as well.
So we say a player one we can reach that one and then we'd walk down from there with say the mesh and
the gun one are both reachable.
Okay that's great.
That means that everything that we know of that we can't reach is now possible.
We can delete and we can delete it whenever we like.
We don't have to delete it right now.
We can postpone it to later.
We can postpone it to when there's not very much going on in the tick.
So that allows us to load balance essentially some of the work that was going on previously had to be
going on straightaway as soon as you got rid of the reference.
Now it can go on a bit slower so you can go ahead and delete player one player to sorry and gun and
his gun at the earliest convenience so that is garbage collection there's lots of advantages to that.
And that's why.
And real does make heavy use of garbage collection in fact let's challenge you to how unreel actually
does do it.
Let's see if you can go ahead do a little bit of independent research and see if you can find out how
unreal does reference cattycorner how do we reference count an object in unreal.
How do we ask it to do that what code are we going to use to.
How does unreel know what objects to scan for garbage collection.
So I said here in the pre In this example that it has a set of objects that it knows about.
So that it can say essentially well I know about these objects but I couldn't reach them so I can delete
them.
It needs to first start off with a set of things that it knows about.
How does it know what that set of things is.
And then how does unreel know which pointers it should follow because obviously it's going to have all
sorts of pointers in C plus plus not all of them are going to be pointers to things inside this set.
How does it know which ones of these pointers should actually be following See if you can answer these
three questions.
Pause the video do this challenge will really help you cement your knowledge of garbage collection and
reference counting that you've just seen in this video and I'll see you on the flipside.
Okay.
Welcome back.
On the flipside I did mean the challenge solution which I'm going to take you through right now.
Let's have a look at a reference counting in unreal as a starting point.
The think you would be using is a t shared pointer.
Exactly as we saw in the last lecture so far a teacher pointer is actually this slightly inferior form
of memory management.
That is the reference counting approach.
Now it's not exactly inferior It just has some disadvantages but it's also quite light weight and quite
easy to use.
So teacher pointer is great.
We can use two shared pointer.
It's much better than doing everything manually the way a teacher pointer works is very simple you construct
a teacher pointers you create a shared point that actually exists on the stack.
It's a pointer.
So it exists here on the stack but it is pointing to an object out on the heap.
When you construct a T shed pointer it will increment the reference count of the object it's pointing
to.
So you know that when you've got a shared point hanging around that object on the heap is never going
to disappear.
You can have as many shared points as the same object as you like.
The reference counts just going to go up.
But then what happens is very interesting as you roll back the stack as you delete objects from the
stack.
You may end up deleting the teacher pointer and so when distracting the teacher point a decrements the
reference count.
Very very useful.
That means if you decrement the reference count then eventually that will go down to zero and eventually
will clear up the memory on the stack.
And we will not end up with leaking memory at least if we don't have cycles.
Okay then we're going to go to garbage collection in unreal.
How do we do that.
Well garbage collection in real is automatically on for all you objects.
All you objects in unreel will be part of that garbage collection set in inverted commas.
Unreel starts from a so-called roots set.
Now there are functions that we can call to put objects you object in the root set and this means that
they will never be garbage collected because they are believed to be right at the top of the hierarchy
absolutely integral to the working of your program.
So this is the root set and that's where it starts from.
That's where it starts walking and it walks down.
What links does it walk down it walks down the you property point is so anything that is a U property
on a U object is automatically going to be subject to garbage collection.
If you have a new property pointer to another you object then you can be safely sure that your object
isn't going to disappear at least at least if that object has not been d allocated.
If you as in if nobody is pointing to you then that object might be fair game to remove as well.
And so any object not found when walking through that set.
Going through each of you property that is fair game it can be deleted by the garbage collection whenever
unreel feels like it wants to.
So that is how garbage collection is done in unreal.
Very useful to know.
Now we know why we're using that t shared pointer because we're dealing with an interface that isn't
going to be a new object so we need to use something that doesn't use this new object mechanism.
But we still want it to be easier than just using a raw pointer and having to allocate an deallocate.
So in that case we use a shared pointer.
Perfect.
So we've got the idea of why we're using a shared pointer in and real and in the next lecturn we can
go on and actually make use of it.